ANALYSIS OF THE BETTER LIFE INDEX TROUGH A CLUSTER ALGORITHM
Abstract

Purpose: This paper discusses some concepts attributed to the term Well-Being and different ways to measure it. Then we present an alternative approach based on clustering algorithm to measure Quality of Life considering each dimension of the OECD well-being indicator, the Better Life Index, to minimize the loss of information encountered on aggregated indicators and to obtain a consistent and solid profile, a segmentation per dimension of the countries contemplated by this indicator. Methodology: To build a consistent and solid profile, first we have standardized each variable, so the influence of a variable that is measured on a much larger scale than the other ones could be removed, then a K-Means algorithm was applied for each dimension and the number of clusters was validated by the Silhouette Coefficient and by a visual inspection of the first two or three principal components (PCA) for dimensions with more than two variables. The resulting clusters could be finally analysed. Findings: The profiles are considered methodologically robust, because in all dimension we have found no negative values for the Silhouette Coefficient, meaning that the countries that belong to a certain cluster have a high similarity while different clusters held a high dissimilarity and additionally the PCA visual inspection have reinforced our analysis retaining, at least, 89% of common variance for dimension with more than two variables. Limitations: Although the Better Life Index it’s the most complete well-being indicator, considering 11 of the 14 well-being dimensions, only 38 countries are encompassed by the indicator, therefore inferences about countries outside this set may be not significant. Hence a detailed analysis of each dimension is necessary. Originality: The combination of the Silhouette Coefficient and the PCA visual inspection proved to be very efficient to analyse this type of data and to validate the number of cluster. Clustering each dimension and then building a profile of countries, proved to be a strong methodology that separates homogeneous elements in heterogeneous groups.

Key Words: Well-Being, Quality of Life Indicators, Clustering Algorithm
	Introduction
Well-being measurement is becoming a relevant topic in recent studies and although indicators such as GDP or HDI are fundamental to analyze regional development, indicators that measure Quality of Life or Well-being have shown to be more complete in fulfilling this function. The literature shows that Quality of Life indicators usually contemplates a variety of dimensions such as, social, economic, environmental, personal satisfaction, and others (Table 1), and these dimensions allows the decision maker to obtain a deeper insight into the areas that may need greater investments and improvements.
Different views about the concepts and frameworks around Well-being and Quality of Life indicators may arise in the literature. While some believe that Well-being only considers subjective issues, other relates it to a broad concept as Quality of Life and believe that objective issues also must be considered on its evaluation. One of the most accepted initiative to evaluate Quality of Life is the OECD Better Life Index. According to OECD (2014), 
The Organization has been working for more than a decade to identify the best way to measure the progress of societies – moving beyond GDP and examining the areas that impact people's lives. In 2011, the culmination of this work was presented in the OECD Better Life Initiative.
The OECD Better Life Initiative focuses on developing statistics to capture aspects of life that matter to people and that shape the quality of their lives. This allows for a better understanding of what drives the well-being of people and nations, and what needs to be done to achieve greater progress for all. Drawing upon the recommendations of the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress (to which the OECD has been an important contributor), the OECD has identified 11 dimensions as being essential to well-being, from health and education to local environment, personal security and overall satisfaction with life, as well as more traditional measures such as income.
On the other hand, there is a discussion about what methodology had better evaluated Quality of Life. Ranking methods can be useful to compare countries with each other, and the global indices may deviate from the reality due to the loss of information that occurs in composite indicators.
With this background, this article proposes an alternative methodology different from composite indicators, considering the Better Life Index (BLI) framework, which was evaluated as the most complete among those analyzed in this study.
Section 2 identifies, based on the indicators surveyed, what determines well-being and how it can be measured, pointing out which indicators and methodologies are most used in the construction of a Quality of Life index. It presents some advantages and disadvantages in the use of composite indices methodologies and the advantages of using clustering measures that allow verifying the performance of the units in each evaluated dimension. Section 3 presents the clustering methodology used to separate countries according to each dimension of the Better Life Index, where the K-Means algorithm, the Silhouette Coefficient and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) are explained. Section 4 presents Better Life Index variables and its description. Section 5 analyzes the Better Life Dimensions according to clustering approach used in this research and section 6 presents the final considerations.
	Literature Review
	Concept of Well-Being/ Quality of Life (QOL)
Satisfaction is a concept that is behind most personal goals. Among these goals are: having a job that gives an income people can afford a decent location to live, with security, basic sanitation, hospitals nearby and the possibility to have fun. For this and so many other goals, it is necessary that public sector play its part and society supervise and charge what is being done so that its needs are met. However, there are some goals that public sector cannot provide, for example happiness, family, friends, etc., but they still play a great part of what people need to be satisfied.
According to Cambridge Dictionary, 
Satisfaction is:
a pleasant feeling that you get when you receive something you wanted, or when you have done something you wanted to do;
a way of dealing with a complaint or problem that makes the person who complained feel happy;
the act of fulfilling (achieving) a need or wish.
In the same dictionary, it’s found the meaning of Well-being:
the state of feeling healthy and happy.
Satisfaction concept permits the achievement of well-being as when someone fulfills his needs or desires, he is more likely to be happy or healthy. Both concepts are in some way related to the quest of Quality of Life. Many authors discuss well-being and their approaches mainly relates to what determine well-being and how it can be measured. 
Diener and Suh (1997) address this issue explaining three philosophical approaches to determine Quality of Life. The first approach is dictated by normative ideals and its related to social indicators. The second approach is based on the satisfaction of preferences. In this definition, Quality of Life is based on whether citizens can obtain the things they desire considering its resources constraints. The third definition is associated with the subjective well-being such as feeling of joy, pleasure, life satisfaction. Diener and Suh (1997) center their work on the controversial question of using objective or subjective indicators (SWB) to measure well-being.
Veenhoven (2006) raises two problems regard to terms Quality of Life, well-being, happiness, welfare which are used to indicate how well people are being. The author says that,
these terms do not have an unequivocal meaning. Sometimes they are used as an umbrella for all that is good, but on other occasions they denote specific merit.... The second problem is in the connotation of inclusiveness. The use of the words as an umbrella term suggests that there is such a thing as overall Quality of Life and that specific merits can be meaningfully added in some wider worth; however, that holistic assumption is dubious. Philosophers have never agreed on one final definition of Quality of Life, and in the practice of empirical Quality of Life measurement we see comparisons of apples and pears. (p.1)
According to Gasper (2010),
The ‘well-being’ (WB) term is used more when we speak at the level of individuals, and ‘Quality of Life’ (QoL) somewhat more when we speak of communities, localities, and societies. Similarly, ‘wellbeing’ is used somewhat more to refer to actual experience, and ‘Quality of Life’ more to refer to context and environments. But in both cases the terms are used with a broad range of meanings, and the ranges almost completely overlap. This reflects that the two came from different disciplines – ‘well-being’ more from psychology and ‘Quality of Life’ more from sociology and social policy – which have only gradually and incompletely become open to each other.
Authors (DIENER and SUH, 1997; VEENHOVEN, 2002; VEENHOVEN, 2006; GASPER, 2010; DIENER et al., 2009; GREYLING and TREGENNA, 2017; HUPPERT and SO, 2013) are emphasizing the importance about of well-being indicators framework, which in turn revolves around its broad concept. Although some researchers (GASPER, 2010; DIENER et al., 2009) point out that its concept go beyond the distinction between objective and subjective well-being (SWB), this classification of Quality of Life indicators is still a point of controversy. To compound well-being structure, some argue for the use of objective indicators, which are those, according to Veenhoven (2006) that “refers to the degree to which life meets explicit standards of good life as assessed by an impartial outsider.” Others advocate the use of only subjective indicators, which according to the same author “concerns self-appraisals based on implicit criteria, for example, someone's subjective feeling of health.”
Veenhoven (2006) lists eight criticisms related to SWB: pragmatic objections, unstable, incomparable, unintelligible, unrelated to objective reality, incorrect, validity doubts and reliability doubts. Despite these weaknesses, the author says that SWB are indispensable in social policy, both for selecting policy goals and for assessing policy success. Objective indicators alone do not provide sufficient information.
For Diener and Suh (1997), “social indicators or objective indicators can assess societal qualities that do not rest solely on their influence on subjective well-being, but which are based on widely shared values”. Otherwise, “the major advantage of subjective well-being measures is that they capture experiences that are important to the individual. Because most objective social indicators are indirect measures of how people feel about their life conditions, SWB measures provide an important additional assessment that can be used to evaluate the evidence summarized by objective indicators”.
They affirm that it seems possible that objective resources should strongly influence individuals' SWB because how people perceive their assets in comparison to others may determine how they feel about their lives and circumstances. 
Social indicators and subjective well-being measures are complementary. Objective inputs are transformed by individuals and cultures to produce what is perceived by people as desirable or undesirable. Subjective well-being measures assess people's actual reactions that are involved in such a transactional process. What is good for people cannot be determined without taking their views into account.
Hagerty et al. (2001) proposed fourteen criteria do evaluate Quality of Life Indexes. Among them stand out (i) the importance of having subjective and objective dimensions to measure QoL, because both subjective and objective indicators are needed to capture the totality of the means and ends, and (ii) the index should help public policymakers develop and assess programs at all levels of aggregation. 
This last-mentioned criterion is so relevant that institutions and researchers have sought different ways to measure Quality of Life, so the indicators is the closest as possible to reality and thereby decision makers use it as an instrument to help improve population´s Quality of Life. In this sense, a review of general Well-Being indicators was carried out focusing its analysis on indicators framework and methodology used.
	Measures of Well-Being/ Quality of Life (QoL)
The following table presents 9 general Well-Being indicators composed by objective and subjective indicators, their dimensions and methodology used. It should be noted that this indicators list is far from exhaustive, leaving out specific ones such as those referring to sector, discipline, gender, age, social class, etc.
Table 1: General Well-Being Indicators

All indicators listed on the Table 1 consider both objective and subjective dimensions to measure Well-Being. Looking at the set of indicators, there are 14 dimensions and Table 2 shows this distribution among them.
Table 2: Dimensions distribution among indicators.

Dimensions related to health issues appear in all indicators, those related to income and life satisfaction / global well-being appear in eight indicators. Civic engagement/ governance and education dimensions are presented in seven indicators. Six of them present dimensions related to environment. Safety issues and community/ social life dimension appears in five. Dimensions related to employment and housing/ living conditions are found in four. Time and freedom of choice can be seen in three, and finally, generosity and state of IQ are seen in only one indicator.
There is a concern about the disadvantages of measures that aggregate several indicators to have a global indicator and thus be able to rank different units. Although the ranking is valuable enough to use units that are better evaluated as benchmark, the global indices may deviate from the reality of the units evaluated due to the loss of information that occurs in composite indicators.
In the present analysis, the authors were careful to use methodologies that minimize the problems found in composite indicators. All of them used equal weights for all dimensions to reduce the compensation problems associated. Multivariate techniques and sensitivity analysis were also used to minimize issues of information loss.
In this sense, Chaaban et al. (2016) highlights that the critics around composite indicator points to the subjective judgment necessary in choosing the indicators and the assumedly arbitrary weighting schemes used to combine these variables. But, they say that all composite indicators sacrifice some analytical purity in this synthesis, but this may be justifiable if it can make the information significantly easier to wield. For them, there is a concrete need to develop a comprehensive composite indicator, which includes the largest number of countries while ensuring that the vital areas of well-being are included and pooled from survey data as well as aggregate socio-economic indicators. 
Michalos et al. (2011) list the advantages and disadvantages of composite indicator. Among them, they stand out as advantages: 
A single composite index yielding a single numerical value is an excellent communications tool for use with practically any constituency, including the news media, general public, and elected and unelected key decision makers.
They make it easier to measure and visually represent overall trends in several distinct indicators over time and/or across geographic regions and/or population groups. (pp. 25)
In addition, as disadvantages are:
A single index must oversimplify complex issues.
Oversimplified messages will give misleading policy directions, leading to poor policies and programs.
There will still be politically motivated, biased selections.
Particular issues will be buried in composite figures, including changes in component variables that significantly increase or decrease the composite figures. (pp.26)
Eurostat (2011) affirms, 
Multivariate techniques (correlations, Cronbach, correspondence and factor analysis) can facilitate the computation of a limited number of 'homogenous' synthetic indicators for each (sub) dimension with little loss of information. Whenever indicators capture distinct, but equally relevant sub-dimensions, their aggregation might transparency about the different facets of the phenomena. Aggregation in this case might proceed through composite indicators that usually include a wide range of dimensions. However, this approach can create analytical and interpretative problems, as it would involve very heterogeneous measures that are very different conceptually and metrically. (p.5)
Clustering methods are alternative approaches that allows multidimensional analysis of the evaluated units, verifying the its homogeneity and classifying these groups according to their profile. In addition, it enables a detailed analysis by dimensions and indicators, avoiding loss of information.
	The K-means Clustering Algorithm
Clustering techniques constitute a division of unsupervised learning pattern recognition, since it basically seeks a structure of natural clusters for a dataset, based on their similarities or dissimilarities (JOHNSON and WICHERN, 1998; WITTEN and FRANK, 2005; PO et al. 2009).
According to Mooi and Sarstedt (2011) clustering techniques are a convenient method to identify homogeneous groups of objects that share many commons characteristics. According to Samoilenko and Osei-Bryson (2008) these homogeneous groups are represented by partitions of objects, with a high similarity between themselves, and a low similarity between the elements of the other groups. 
Samoilenko and Osei-Bryson (2008), pointed out that there are several algorithms available to form clusters, and in this study, we choose to focus in a partition algorithm known as k-means (MCQUEEN, 1967), which is intended to group objects into a collection of k natural groups based in a distance measure. The simplicity and computational speed of the k-means algorithm has made it a popular choice. However, the number of groups, k, need to be specified in advance (JOHNSON and WICHERN, 1998). Standardizing the dataset improves convergence of k-means algorithm and as suggested by Berg et al. (2006) scaling datasets with differences in orders of magnitude improves their interpretability.
Thus, as reported by Johnson and Wichern (1998) and by Witten and Frank (2005) the k-means algorithm aims to create k clusters, where each object is allocated near the closest k^th cluster centroid. According to Peña et al. (1999), the algorithm can be described by the following pseudo-code:
Figure 1: K-means pseudo-code
As demonstrated in the Figure 1, the k-means algorithm needs an initial number of k clusters and their centroids values. In the next step, each object of the dataset is relocated to the cluster represented by the nearest centroid to reduce the square-error. When an object is relocated, in other words, its cluster membership changes, then the centroids of the clusters C_s and C_t and the square-error should be recomputed. These steps are repeated until convergence; therefore, the square-error cannot be reduced, and no object can change its cluster membership (PEÑA et al. 1999).
Still, the algorithm has some drawbacks, the first of one refers to the number of k clusters and the second one refers to the values selected to be the initial centroids. Using the wrong number of k clusters the k-means algorithm does not generates natural clusters, and even if the wright number of cluster is chosen, inadequate centroid values may lead to a local optimum that, also, do not generate natural clusters.
The first drawback can be solved by calculating specific indicators that can recommend an optimum value for k. Nevertheless, Charrad et al. (2014) points out that there are over 30 types of indicator s that can recommend (some of them poorly) the optimal number of k clusters, and each indicator possess their own advantages, disadvantages, and requirements. Nonetheless recent studies conducted by Arbelaitz et al. (2013), Chouikhi et al. (2015), Mufti et al. (2012) and Wu and Chan, (2013) have indicated that the silhouette coefficient as the tool of choice to recommend the optimum number of clusters, since, it was the best indicator in all studies and offer the advantage that it only depends on the actual partition of the objects, and not on the clustering algorithm that was used to generate it.
The second drawback can be solved, allowing the algorithm to run several times and each time with a different set of random seeds (initial centroids). Then we can choose the set of initial values that generates the most common partitions (clusters that appears in all or in most iterations). In this study, we allowed the algorithm to run for 10,000 times for each dataset to avoid being trapped in a local minimum.
	The Silhouette Coefficient
The Silhouette index developed by Rousseeuw (1987) measures based on the comparison of clusters tightness (similarity within a cluster) and separation (difference between clusters), their relative quality and an overview of the dataset configuration. Likewise, the author affirms that the silhouette coefficient provides an evaluation of clustering validity and might be used to select an appropriate number of clusters if the proximities are on a ratio scale (usually, the Euclidean distance) and when one is seeking compact and separated clusters. 
Figure 2: Silhoutte pseudo-code
As indicated in Figure 2, after the clusters are obtained we need to calculate the average distance a(i) which is the average distance between the objects within the same cluster and then we need to find, which is the average distance d(i) between the objects from other clusters. We call b(i) as the minimum value of d(i), and then calculate the silhouette coefficient s(i) for each C_k cluster. However, if the cardinality, or in other words, the number of elements n(C_k) is equal one, then arbitrarily the s(i) is set to zero as indicated by Rousseeuw, (1987). From the equation in step 3 of the Figure 2, we can see that:
-1≤s(i)≤1       (01)
The silhouette shows which objects lie well within their cluster if s(i)≥0, and which ones are merely somewhere in between clusters if s(i)<0. 
	Clustering Methodology
Principal component analysis (PCA), developed by Pearson (1901) and as described by Jolliffe (2002) its central idea is to reduce the dimensionality of a dataset while retaining as much as possible of the present variance. Transforming the dataset, through an orthogonal transformation, into a new set of variables (principal components), which are uncorrelated and ordered, for example the first principal component retain more variance than the second one and so on, we can visualize a high-dimensional dataset in a lower-dimensional projection (usually 2D) in a reliable way if these few principal components can retain more than a certain percentage of the total variance. In this study, we will consider the retained percentage of variance as 80%, in other words, if two or three principal components can explain at least 80% of variance then our proposed clustering methodology can be applied.
Figure 3: Clustering pseudo-code
Figure 3 indicates that first we must standardize each variable, so the influence of a variable that is measured on a much larger scale than the other ones can be removed, as proposed by Dubes and Jain (1980), Lorr (1983), Romesburg (1984), Sokal (1961), Milligan and Cooper (1988), Spath (1980) and Williams et al. (1966). The number of clusters is validated by the Silhouette Coefficient and by a visual inspection of the first two or three principal components (PCA) then the K-means algorithm can be performed, and the resulting clusters can be finally analyzed.
Dimensions with exactly two variables can be directly graphically inspected without PCA components extraction and Dimensions with only one variable can be analyzed in a more straightforward manner, we have separated then in four clusters: 1) below -2 standard deviations, 2) between -2 and -1 standard deviations, 3) between -1 and +1 standard deviations and 4) above +1 standard deviations.
	Variables Description
This section presents the variables that composes each dimension of the Better Life Index and the list of countries encompassed by the indicator.

1) Housing
Dwellings without basic facilities (DWBF) – This variable refers to the percentage of the population living in a dwelling without indoor flushing toilet for the sole use of the household.
Rooms per person (RPP) – This variable refers to the number of rooms (excluding kitchenette, scullery/utility room, bathroom, toilet, garage, consulting rooms, office, shop) in a dwelling divided by the number of persons living in the dwelling.
Housing expenditure (HEX) – This variable considers the expenditure of households in housing and maintenance of the house, as defined in the System of National Accounts - SNA (P31CP040: Housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels; P31CP050: Furnishings, households’ equipment and routine maintenance of the house).
2) Income
Household net adjusted disposable income (HADI) – It’s the maximum amount that a household can afford to consume without having to reduce its assets or to increase its liabilities.
Household net financial wealth (HFNW) – Net financial wealth consists of: currency and deposits, securities other than share, loans, shares and other equity (including shares issued by investment funds), insurance technical reserves, and other accounts receivable or payable, net of household financial liabilities, as defined by the SNA.
3) Jobs
Labour market insecurity (LMI) – This variable is defined in terms of the expected earnings loss associated with unemployment.
Employment rate (ERT) – It is the number of employed persons aged 15 to 64 over the population of the same age.
Long term unemployment rate (LTUR) – This variable refers to the number of persons who have been unemployed for one year or more as a percentage of the labor force (the sum of employed and unemployed persons).
Personal earnings (PEAR) – It considers the employees’ gross remuneration, that is, the total before any deductions are made by the employer in respect of taxes, contributions of employees to social security and pension schemes, life insurance premiums, union dues and other obligations of employees.
4) Community
Social network support (QOSN) – It’s a measure of perceived social network support. This variable is based on the question: “If you were in trouble, do you have relatives or friends you can count on to help you whenever you need them, or not?” and it considers the respondents who respond positive.
5) Education
Educational attainment (EATT) – Educational attainment considers the number of adults aged 25 to 64 holding at least an upper secondary degree over the population of the same age, as defined by the International Standard Classification of Education.
Students’ cognitive skills (SSK) – Students’ average score in reading, mathematics and science as assessed by the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA).
Expected years in education (YED) – This variable is the average duration of education in which a 5-year-old child can expect to enroll during his/her lifetime until the age of 39.
6) Environment
Air pollution (AIRP) – This variable is the population weighted average of annual concentrations of particulate matters less than 2.5 microns in diameter (PM 2.5) in the air.
Satisfaction with water quality (WQUAL) – This variable captures people’s subjective appreciation of the environment where they live, the quality of the water. It is based on the question: “In the city or area where you live, are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the quality of water?” and it considers people who responded they are satisfied.
7) Civic Engagement
Stakeholder engagement for developing regulations (SEDR) – This variable describes the extent to which formal stakeholder engagement is built in the development of primary laws and subordinate regulations.
Voter turnout (VTOU) – It is defined as the ratio between the number of individuals that cast a ballot during an election (whether this vote is valid or not) to the population registered to vote.
8) Health
Life expectancy at birth (LFEX) – Life expectancy measures how long on average people could expect to live based on the age-specific death rates currently prevailing.
Self-reported health status (SRH) – This variable refers to the percentage of the population aged 15 years old and over who report “good” or better health.
9) Life Satisfaction
Life satisfaction (LFSF) – This variable considers people’s evaluation of their life. It is a weighted-sum of different response categories based on people’s rates of their current life relative to the best and worst possible lives for them on a scale from 0 to 10, using the Cantril Ladder (known also as the “Self-Anchoring Striving Scale”).
10) Safety
Feeling safe walking alone at night (FSWAN) – This variable is based on the question: “Do you feel safe walking alone at night in the city or area where you live?” and it shows people declaring they feel safe.
Homicides rates (HRT) – Deaths due to assault.
11) Work-Life Balance
Employees working very long hours (EWVLH) – This variable measures the proportion of dependent employed whose usual hours of work per week are 50 hours or more.
Time devoted to leisure and personal care (TDLPC) – This variable measures the number of hours (minutes) per day that, on average, full-time employed people spend on leisure and on personal care activities.
Table 3: Countries

Table 3 indicates the countries encompassed by the Better Life Index and their number identification. The following countries are not OECD members: Brazil (36), Russia (37) and South Africa (38).
	Dimension Analysis
If a dimension has more than one variable is analyzed with the aid of four graphs. The first one (top left) indicates for each number of clusters an average of the Silhouette Coefficient, in the vertical axis it is show the silhouette values and in the horizontal axis it is indicated the number of clusters. 
The points around the maximum silhouette value or the point in the maximum silhouette value indicate the probable number of clusters. The second graph (top right) has the silhouette value for each element in the cluster, and a cluster is homogeneous if each element does not possess a silhouette with a negative value. 
The third graph (bottom left) represents the dimensional representation of the clustered data, if a dimension has more than two variables then this graph represents the components of the PCA, if a dimension has exactly two variables, each axis represents one variable. Finally, the fourth graph (bottom right) represents the world map where each country has its cluster indicated by color.
We would like to emphasize that the considered variables for each dimension will respect the Better Life Index framework and that cluster with few or only one membership can occur due the dissimilarity between the observation and the other formed clusters.
Dimension 1 – Housing (DWBF; HEX; RPP) with 90.2% of Common Variance
Figure 4: Dimension 1
The optimal number of clusters indicated by the average silhouette width is two. However, the cluster plot indicates that a total of five clusters has a better natural arrangement, without having elements with negative silhouette width and their average do not decrease significantly from the optimal number.
Cluster 1: Czech Republic; Denmark; Greece; Iceland; Italy; Slovakia.
Cluster 2: Chile; Estonia; Hungary; Israel; Korea (Republic of); Mexico; Poland; Turkey; Brazil.
Cluster 3: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Finland; France; Germany; Ireland; Japan; Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Portugal; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States.
Cluster 4: Russia; South Africa.
Cluster 5: Latvia.
Table 4: Dimension 1

According to Arnott (2008), the larger relative size of the informal economy in developing countries imposes important constraints on government policy that are not present in developed countries. These constraints significantly influence the form of sound housing policy in developing countries and undermine the effectiveness of many housing policies that have been successful in developed countries. 
The arguments for this affirmative are: (i) the impact of informal sector on the income transfers programs; (ii) the reluctance of governments to subsidize unauthorized housing; (iii) the distortionary fiscal systems generated by the informal sector compromise the fiscal capacity of the government and the provision of public services; and (iv) the consensus that redistribution in developed countries is best performed by central government, as this reduces welfare-induced migration.
On the other hand, in general, developing countries don’t see the housing sector as an economic development tool and the inadequate attention given to this sector has exacerbated the poor and inadequate housing situations of most cities (ARKU, 2006).
In this way, the housing dimension clustering shows that developed countries are closer to each other on clusters 1 and 3, as well as developing countries on clusters 2, 4 and 5.
Dimension 2 – Income (HADI; HFNW)
Figure 5: Dimension 2
The optimal number of clusters, indicated by the average silhouette width, is three and the cluster plot indicates the same number.
Cluster 1: Chile; Czech Republic; Estonia; Greece; Hungary; Ireland; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Mexico; Poland; Portugal; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Turkey; Brazil; Russia; South Africa.
Cluster 2: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Denmark; Finland; France; Germany; Iceland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Sweden; United Kingdom.
Cluster 3: Switzerland; United States.
Table 5: Dimension 2

According to OECD (2016), the HADI (expressed in thousands in Table 5) includes income from economic activity, property income, social benefits in cash, and social transfers in kind. And the HNFW (also expressed in thousands in Table 5) is the total value of a household's financial worth, or the sum of their overall financial assets minus liabilities. 
Switzerland and United States are grouped together in cluster 3 and represent countries with very high HADI and HNFW indicators. In fact, their net financial wealth is very similar and much higher than the average of cluster 2 which present some developed countries with a high HNFW but lower HADI when compared to US and Switzerland, the opposite is also true. Finally, cluster 1 represents developing countries with lower indicators of income and financial wealth.
Dimension 3 – Jobs (LMI; ERT; LTUR; PEAR) with 92.4% of Common Variance
Figure 6: Dimension 3
The optimal number of clusters, indicated by the average silhouette width, is two. However, the cluster plot indicates that a total of three clusters has a better natural arrangement, and although the average silhouette value has decreased, this arrangement, guarantees that all elements have silhouette width values greater than zero.
Cluster 1: Greece; Spain; South Africa.
Cluster 2: Chile; Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Israel; Italy; Latvia; Mexico; Poland; Portugal; Slovakia; Slovenia; Turkey; Brazil; Russia.
Cluster 3: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Denmark; Finland; France; Germany; Iceland; Ireland; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Sweden; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States.
Table 6: Dimension 3

Employment and wage levels are directly related to the economic activity and the government policies to accelerate it, however, the financial crisis in 2008 severely affected economic activity worldwide. Developing countries and those most dependent on foreign trade and tourism were the most impacted, as these countries suffer from the inefficiency of fiscal and monetary policies to improve economic activity, and yet, many still have a high level of informal work and/or are experiencing some sort of political crises. Clusters 1 and 2 represents the countries with these characteristics, while cluster 3 presents developed countries with policies that seems to be more efficient to minimize unemployment.
Dimension 4 - Community
Figure 7: Dimension 4
Dimensions with only one variable can be analyzed in a more straightforward manner, we have separated then in four clusters: 1) below -2 standard deviations, 2) between -2 and -1 standard deviations, 3) between -1 and +1 standard deviations and 4) above +1 standard deviations.
Cluster 1: Chile; Greece; Hungary; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Mexico; Turkey.
Cluster 2: Belgium; France; Israel; Netherlands; Poland; Portugal; Slovenia.
Cluster 3: Austria; Canada; Czech Republic; Estonia; Finland; Germany; Italy; Japan; Luxembourg; Norway; Slovakia; Sweden; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States; Brazil; Russia; South Africa.
Cluster 4: Australia; Denmark; Iceland; Ireland; New Zealand; Spain.
Table 7: Dimension 4

The World Happiness Report 2017 (UNITED NATIONS, 2017, p. 31), affirms that for a country to have 10% more of its population with someone to count on, the average life evaluations should increase 0.23 points on a 0 to 10 scale, which is equivalent to doubling the GDP per capita. 
The World Health Organization (2010, p.7) studied the factors associated with a broad social environment that can create opportunities to improve young people’s health and concluded that:
	The accumulation of support from parents, siblings and peers leads to an even stronger predictor of positive health: the higher the number of sources of support, the more likely it is that the children will experience positive health.
	Peers are therefore valuable social contacts who contribute to young people’s health and well-being but can also be negative influences in relation to risk behaviors such as smoking and drinking: this is a complex area.
	Those who perceive their school as supportive are more likely to engage in positive health behaviors and have better health outcomes, including good self-rated health, high levels of life satisfaction, few health complaints and low smoking prevalence.
	Neighborhoods that engender high levels of social capital create better mental health, more health-promoting behaviors, fewer risk-taking behaviors, better overall perceptions of health and greater likelihood of physical activity
This dimension analyzed the perception of social connections and the countries were aggregated according to similarities of their own perceptions about the support people have from their family and friends.
Dimension 5 – Education (EATT; SSK; YED) with 89.4% of Common Variance
Figure 8: Dimension 5
The optimal number of clusters, indicated by the average silhouette width, is two and the cluster plot indicates the same number.
Cluster 1: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hungary; Iceland; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Poland; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States; Russia.
Cluster 2: Chile; Mexico; Portugal; Turkey; Brazil; South Africa.
Table 8: Dimension 5

Barro and Lee (2013, p. 184) affirms that the number of well-educated citizens has a positive association with a high level of labor productivity. Similarly, the relation between education, the ability to absorb advanced technology and social outcomes (child mortality, fertility, education of children, and income distribution) can also be implied. 
According Glewwe et al. (2011), since 1980 government expenditures in education doubled in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, almost tripled in the Middle East, and increased by more than five-fold in East Asia and by almost eight-fold in South Asia. However, in developing countries these investments are being directed towards the increase of staff and number of enrollments, but not to improve the quality of the students, as the performance of them in PISA tests are not increasing in general. 
Cluster 2 is formed by developing countries with low performance on education indicators, while cluster 1 shows countries with high performance on education indicators.
Dimension 6 – Environment (AIRP; WQUAL)
Figure 9: Dimension 6
The optimal number of clusters indicated by the average silhouette width is four. However, the cluster plot indicates that a total of five clusters has a better natural arrangement, without having elements with negative silhouette width and their average do not decrease significantly from the optimal number.
Cluster 1: Chile; Greece; Hungary; Italy; Latvia; Mexico; Spain; Turkey; Brazil; South Africa.
Cluster 2: Russia.
Cluster 3: Austria; Belgium; Czech Republic; France; Germany; Japan; Luxembourg; Netherlands; Poland; Slovakia; Slovenia; Switzerland.
Cluster 4: Australia; Canada; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; Iceland; Ireland; New Zealand; Norway; Portugal; Sweden; United Kingdom; United States.
Cluster 5: Israel; Korea (Republic of).
Table 9: Dimension 6

As stated by Hsu et al. (2016), environmental health is not merely a consideration for some people, but is central to human well-being, as nations become wealthier, investments are made in infrastructure that generally lead to improve public health. However, not all countries are not protecting the environment efficiently, as the Environmental Performance Index (EPI) points out that:
	The number of people lacking access to clean water has been nearly cut in half from 960 million in 2000 to 550 million in 2016, around 8% of the world’s population, 2.4 billion people lack access to sanitation.
	Around one-third of countries are reducing their carbon intensity.
But, the effort to protect environment and improve air and water quality is heterogeneous among countries. For instance, cluster 4, containing mostly North America, Oceania and Scandinavia countries as well Portugal, presented best performance, while compared the other clusters. And in general cluster 2 presents the worst performance.
Dimension 7 – Civic Engagement (SEDR; VTOU)
Figure 10: Dimension 7
The optimal number of clusters indicated by the average silhouette width is seven. However, the cluster plot indicates that a total of three clusters has a better natural arrangement, without having elements with negative silhouette width and their average do not decrease significantly from the optimal number.
Cluster 1: Australia; Belgium; Denmark; France; Germany; Iceland; Korea (Republic of); Luxembourg; New Zealand; Norway; Sweden; Turkey.
Cluster 2: Canada; Czech Republic; Estonia; Finland; Latvia; Mexico; Poland; Slovakia; Slovenia; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States.
Cluster 3: Austria; Chile; Greece; Hungary; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Netherlands; Portugal; Spain; Brazil; Russia; South Africa.
Table 10: Dimension 7

According to Golubović (2008), citizen participation in shaping and implementation of public policies is a critical ingredient of participatory democracy, as it provides an opportunity and creates conditions necessary for citizens to engage in political life regularly. It creates a framework for citizens to advocate for their legitimate interests and thus contributes to the development of a democratic society and it makes the work of public authorities more transparent and closer to their constituencies, contributing to the quality of the public policy and if all stakeholders participate in the process, their legitimate interests will presumably be protected.
Both indicators SEDR and VTOU are essential to check if the country is moving towards a sustainable political development. Cluster 1 and 2, represented by developed countries, presented the highest average scores in SEDR, but the same could not be achieved by the VTOU variable. The heterogeneous election systems found in different countries distorted the result.
Dimension 8 – Health (LFEX, SRH)
Figure 11: Dimension 8
The optimal number of clusters indicated by the average silhouette width is four. However, the cluster plot indicates that a total of five clusters has a better natural arrangement, without having elements with negative silhouette width and their average do not decrease significantly from the optimal number.
Cluster 1: Japan; Korea (Republic of); Portugal.
Cluster 2: Austria; Belgium; Denmark; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Iceland; Italy; Luxembourg; Netherlands; Norway; Slovenia; Spain; United Kingdom.
Cluster 3: Chile; Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Mexico; Poland; Slovakia; Turkey; Brazil; Russia.
Cluster 4: Australia; Canada; Ireland; Israel; New Zealand; Sweden; Switzerland; United States.
Cluster 5: South Africa.
Table 11: Dimension 8

The variable LFEX is one of the main indicators to measure a good health in a country. And the assumption is that people live longer because health-related policies are effective and access to health is provided for all social classes. However, the perception of good health, the SRH variable, may not correlate positively with life expectancy. Cluster 1 composed by Japan, Korea (Republic of) and Portugal has the highest LFEX average, but the lowest SRH average among all clusters.
Cluster 2 and 4, formed by developed countries, have higher averages than clusters 3 and 5, that are formed by developing countries. This is corroborated by World Health Organization (2007) when they affirm that there are imbalances between rich and poor countries in terms of disease burden: 
	About 90% of the global disease burden is in developing countries which account for only 12% of global health spending. 
	High-income countries spent more than 100 times per capita on health than low-income countries. 
	Developing countries will need between US$ 25 – US $ 70 billion in additional aid per year to remove the financing constraint to scaling up to meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Dimension 9 – Life Satisfaction
Figure 12: Dimension 9
Dimensions with only one variable can be analyzed in a more straightforward manner, we have separated then in four clusters: 1) below -2 standard deviations, 2) between -2 and -1 standard deviations, 3) between -1 and +1 standard deviations and 4) above +1 standard deviations.
Cluster 1: Estonia; Greece; Hungary; Portugal; Slovenia; Turkey; South Africa.
Cluster 2: Chile; France; Italy; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Mexico; Poland; Slovakia; Spain; United Kingdom; Brazil; Russia.
Cluster 3: Austria; Belgium; Czech Republic; Germany; Ireland; Israel; Luxembourg; United States.
Cluster 4: Australia; Canada; Denmark; Finland; Iceland; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Sweden; Switzerland.
Table 12: Dimension 9

The level of satisfaction of the respondents of each country follows the pattern of the other dimensions, developing countries and developed countries are separated, clusters 1 and 2, and clusters 3 and 4, respectively, and, the most satisfied people live in countries that have more quality in education, health, and in environment.
Dimension 10 – Safety (FSWAN, HRT)
Figure 13: Dimension 10
The optimal number of clusters, indicated by the average silhouette width, is two and the cluster plot indicates the same number.
Cluster 1: Mexico; Brazil; Russia; South Africa.
Cluster 2: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Chile; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hungary; Iceland; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Poland; Portugal; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; Turkey; United Kingdom; United States.
Table 13: Dimension 9

The 2011 World Bank Report (WORLD BANK, 2011, p.6) states that, “one in four people on the planet, more than 1.5 billion, live in fragile and conflict-affected states or in countries with very high levels of criminal violence”. 
The report classifies the factors to enhance violence in External and Internal factors, as follows: 
External factors can heighten the risks of violence. Major external security pressures, as with new patterns of drug trafficking, can overwhelm institutional capacities. Corruption has pernicious impacts on the risks of violence, by fueling grievances and by undermining the effectiveness of national institutions and social norms. 
Internal factors of conflict arise from political, security, and economic dynamics. Lower GDP per capita is robustly associated with both large-scale political conflict and high rates of homicide. 
The report also points out that countries and subnational areas with the weakest institutional legitimacy and governance are the most vulnerable to violence and instability and the least able to respond to internal and external stresses. 
In line with World Bank (2011) arguments, the present clustering divided countries into two clusters, cluster 1 has countries where the external factors such as corruption and internal ones as institutions with weak legitimacy and ineffective governance are observed, in the other hand, cluster 2 is formed by countries, and most of them, seems to have better policies against violence.
Dimension 11 – Work-Life Balance (EWVLH; TDLPC)
Figure 14: Dimension 11
The optimal number of clusters, indicated by the average silhouette width, is two and the cluster plot indicates the same number.
Cluster 1: Mexico; Turkey.
Cluster 2: Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Chile; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hungary; Iceland; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Korea (Republic of); Latvia; Luxembourg; Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Poland; Portugal; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; United Kingdom; United States; Brazil; Russia; South Africa.
Table 14: Dimension 11

According to OECD (2016), striking the right balance between the commitments of work and those of private life is central to people’s well-being. Too little work can prevent people from earning enough to attain desired standards of living. But too much work can also have a negative impact on well-being if people’s health or personal lives suffer. Cluster 2, formed by Mexico and Turkey, has a great discrepancy in the EWVLH average and a slightly higher value in the TDLPC average when compared with cluster 1. 
Final Considerations
The Better Life Index is the indicator that contemplates most of the well-being dimensions, therefore to gain most of information from this indicator a cluster analysis algorithm that could evaluate each dimension was proposed. The algorithm can cluster the countries in homogenous groups and validate the number of cluster by the Silhouette Coefficient and by visual Inspection through a Principal Component Analysis. There were no negative silhouette values, meaning that the countries that belong to a certain cluster have a high similarity while different clusters held a high dissimilarity. The cluster analysis could enhance the understanding of each dimension, and provide important insights related to the obtained segmentation and the dimension association.
The clusters profiles obtained for each dimension allows important insights that could not be made if a simple variable analysis was performed. 
For instance, in relation to Dimension Housing, the formed clusters could separate developed countries (clusters 1 and 3) from developing countries (clusters 2, 4 and 5). Reflecting mainly how they manage housing sector policies, because as affirmed by Arku (2006), developing countries don’t see the housing sector as an economic development tool. The separation between developed and developing countries was also noted in other Dimensions like Life Satisfaction, where the most satisfied people live in countries that have more quality in education, health and environment.
Regarding the Dimensions Security and Education, one can note that a poor investment into education reflects to an increase in crime. The cluster number 2 in the Security Dimension, composed by, Chile, Mexico, Portugal, Turkey, Brazil and South Africa has lower average of years in education, in the other hand, Mexico, Brazil, Russia and South Africa are the most violent countries with the highest average of homicide rate. Therefore, the common countries formed by Mexico, Brazil and South Africa, to inhibit the entrance in crime, should invest heavily in education.
Another local inference can be made about the Dimensions Environment and Health. The cluster number 4 of the Environment Dimension, composed by Australia, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland; Iceland; Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States, possess the best average in the water quality variable, which is associated with the Health Dimension where the cluster number 2 and 4 presents the highest average for all variables.
For the last example, we can compare the Jobs and Income dimensions. Clusters 1 and 2 from the Jobs Dimension have the lowest average employment rate and the Cluster 1 from the Income Dimension has lowest average for all variables. With the following common countries: Chile, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Brazil, Russia and South Africa.
The given examples are not exhaustive because other relations between two or more dimensions can also be studied, for instance, Subjective Indicators as Life Satisfaction can be related to almost all dimensions. However, we tried to provide some insights and to indicate that clustering each dimension and then building a profile of countries, proved to be a strong methodology to analyze this type of data.

REFERENCES
ARBELAITZ, O., GURRUTXAGA, I., MUGUERZA, J., PERONA, I. (2013). An Extensive Comparative Study of Cluster Validity Indices. Pattern Recognition, Elsevier, Vol. 46, Issue 1, pp. 243-256. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2012.07.021
ARKU, G. (2006). The Housing and Economic Development Debate Revisited: Economic Significance of Housing in Developing Countries. Journal of Housing Built Environment, Vol. 21, Issue 4, pp. 377-395. doi: 10.1007/s10901-006-9056-3 
ARNOTT, R. (2008). Housing Policy in Developing Countries: The Importance of the Informal Economy (English). Commission on Growth and Development. Working Paper; no. 13. Washington, DC: World Bank Available at: <http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/573081468149693974/Housing-policy-in-developing-countries-the-importance-of-the-informal-economy>
BARRO, R., LEE, J.W. (2013). A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950–2010. Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 104, pp.184-198. doi: 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2012.10.001
BERG, R. A., HOEFSLOOT, H.C.J, WESTERHUIS, J.A, SMILDE, A.K., WERF, M.J. (2006). Centering, Scaling, and Transformations: Improving the Biological Information Content of Metabolomics Data. BMC Genomics, Vol. 7, Issue 142. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-7-142
CENTRE FOR BUTHAN STUDIES (2015) Gross National Happiness Index Explained in Detail. Accessed in May/2017. Available at: <http://www.grossnationalhappiness.com/docs/GNH/PDFs/Sabina_Alkire_method.pdf>
CHAABAN, J., IRANI, A., KHOURY, A. (2016). The Composite Global Well-Being Index (CGWBI): A New Multi-Dimensional Measure of Human Development. Social Indicators Research, Vol. 129, Issue 1, pp. 465–48. doi: 10.1007/s11205-015-1112-5
CHARRAD, M., GHAZZALI, N., BOITEAU, V., NIKNAFS, A. (2014). NbClust: An R Package for Determining the Relevant Number of Clusters in a Data Set. Journal of Statistical Software. Vol. 61, Issue 6. doi: 10.18637/jss.v061.i06
CHOUIKHI, H., CHARRAD, M., GHAZZALI, N. (2015). A Comparison Study of Clustering Validity Indices. IEEE. Global Summit on Computer & Information Technology (GSCIT). doi: 10.1109/GSCIT.2015.7353330
DIENER, E. SUH, E. (1997). Measuring Quality of Life: Economic, Social, And Subjective Indicators. Social Indicators Research, Vol. 40, Issue 1-2, pp. 189-216. doi: 10.1023/A:1006859511756
DIENER, E. WIRTZ, D., BISWAS-DIENER, R., TOV, W., KIM-PRIETO, C., CHOI, D.W, OISHI, S. (2009). New Measures of Well-Being. Social Indicators Research Series, Vol. 39, pp. 247-266, doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-2354-4 12
DUBES, R., JAIN, A.K. (1980), Clustering Methodologies in Exploratory Data Analysis. Advances in Computers, Vol. 19, pp. 113-228. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2458(08)60034-0
EUROSTAT (2011). Multidimensional Measurement of the Quality of Life. Accessed in April/2017. Available at: <http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/8131721/8131772/TF3-Final-report-Quality-of-Life.pdf > 
GASPER, D. (2010). Understanding the Diversity of Conceptions of Well-Being and Quality of Life. The Journal of Socio-Economics, Vol. 39, Issue 3, pp. 351–360. doi: 10.1016/j.socec.2009.11.006
GLEWWE, P.W., HANUSHEK, E.A., HUMPAGE, S.D, RAVINA, R. (2011). School Resources and Educational Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Review of the Literature from 1990 to 2010. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 17554. Cambridge, MA. doi: 10.3386/w17554
GOLUBOVIĆ, D. (2008). Citizen Participation in Legislative Processes: A Short Excursion Through European Best Practices. The European Center for Non-Profit Law. Available at: <http://www.ecnl.org/dindocuments/274_Brochure%20on%20citizen%20participation%20ENG.pdf>
GREYLING, T., TREGENNA, F. (2017). Construction and Analysis of a Composite Quality of Life Index for a Region of South Africa. Social Indicators Research, Vol. 131, Issue 3, pp. 887–930. doi: 10.1007/s11205-016-1294-5
HAGERTY, M.R., CUMMINS, R.A, FERRISS, A.L., LAND, K., MICHALOS, A.C., PETERSON, M., SHARPE, A., SIRGY, J., VOGEL, J. (2001). Quality of Life Indexes for National Policy: Review and Agenda for Research. Social Indicators Research, Vol. 55, Issue 1, pp. 1-96. doi: 10.1023/A:1010811312332
HSU, A., ESTY, D.C, LEVY, M.A., SHERBININ, A. (2016). 2016 Environmental Performance Index. New Haven, CT: Yale University. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.19868.90249
HUPPERT, F.A.; SO, T.T.C. (2013). Flourishing Across Europe: Application of a New Conceptual Framework for Defining Well-Being. Vol. 110, pp. 837-861. doi: 10.1007/s11205-011-9966-7 
JOHNSON, R. A.; WICHERN, D. W. (1998). Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis. Prentice Hall, New Jersey. ISBN 0-131-87715-1
JOLLIFFE, I.T. (2002). Principal Component Analysis. Second Edition. Springer-Verlag, NY, Inc. ISBN 0-387-95442-2
LORR, M. (1983), Cluster Analysis for the Social Sciences, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. ISBN: 08-758-9566-2
MCQUEEN, J. (1967). Some Methods for classification and Analysis of Multivariate Observations. Proceedings of 5th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. Vol. 1, Statistics, pp. 281-297. University of California Press, Berkeley, Calif. Mathematical Reviews number: MR0214227. Available at: < https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bsmsp/1200512992>
MICHALOS, A.C., SMALE, B., LABONTÉ, R., MUHARJARINE, N., SCOTT, K., MOORE, K., SWYSTUN, L., HOLDEN, B., BERNADIN, H., DUNNING, B., GUHN, M., GAADERMANN, A.M., ZUMBO, B.D., MORGAN, A., BROOKER, A.-S., HYMAN, I. (2011). The Canadian Index of Wellbeing. Technical Report 1.0. Waterloo, Canadian Index of Wellbeing and University of Waterloo. Available at: <http://www.unesco.org/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CLT/pdf/canadianindexofwellbeingtechnicalpaper.pdf>
MILLIGAN, G.W., COOPER, M.C. (1988). A Study of Standardization of Variables in Cluster Analysis. Journal of Classification. Vol. 5, Issue 2, pp. 181-204. doi: 10.1007/BF01897163
MOOI, E.; SARSTEDT, M. A. (2011). Concise Guide to Market Research: The Process, Data, and Methods Using IBM SPSS Statistics. Heidelberg: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-12541-6
MUFTI, G. B, BERTRAND, P., MOUBARKI, L. (2012). Decomposition of the Rand Index in Order to Assess Both the Stability and The Number of Clusters of a Partition. HAL id: hal-00707357. Available at: <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00707357/document> 
OECD. (2014). Executive summary. Accessed in July/2017. Available at: <http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/media/bli/documents/BLI_executive_summary_2014.pdf>
OECD (2016). Better Life Index 2016: Definitions and Metadata. Accessed in April/2017. Available on: <http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/about/better-life-initiative/>
PEARSON, K. (1901). On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit to Systems of Points in Space. Philosophical Magazine. Vol. 2, Issue 11, pp. 559-572. doi: 10.1080/14786440109462720.
PEÑA, J.M., LOZANO, J.A., LARRAÑAGA, P. (1999). An Empirical Comparison of Four Initialization Methods for the K-Means Algorithm. Pattern Recognition Letters. Vol. 20, Issue 10, pp. 1027-1040. doi: 10.1016/S0167-8655(99)00069-0
PESTA, B.J., MCDANIEL, M.A., BERTSCH, S. (2010). Toward an Index of Well-Being for the Fifty U.S. States. Intelligence, Vol. 38, Issue 1, pp. 160-168. doi: 10.1016/j.intell.2009.09.006 
PO, R.; GUH, Y.; YANG, M. (2009). A New Clustering Approach Using Data Envelopment Analysis. European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 199, Issue 1, pp. 276-284. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2008.10.022
ROMESBURG, H.C. (1984), Cluster Analysis for Researchers, Belmont, CA: Lifet'une Learning Publications. ISBN 05-340-3248-6
ROUSSEEUW, P. J. (1987). Silhouettes: A Graphical Aid to the Interpretation and Validation of Cluster Analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics. Vol. 20, pp. 53-65. doi: 10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7
SAMOILENKO, S.; OSEI-BRYSON, K. (2008). Increasing the Discriminatory Power of DEA in the Presence of the Sample Heterogeneity with Cluster Analysis and Decision Trees. Expert Systems with Applications. Vol. 34, Issue 2, pp. 1568-1581. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2007.01.039
SOKAL, R.R. (1961). Distance as a Measure of Taxonomic Similarity. Systematic Zoology. Vol. 10, Issue 1, pp. 70-79. 10.2307/2411724
SPATH, H. (1980). Cluster Analysis Algorithms for Data Reduction and Classification of Objects, Ellis Horwood. ISBN 04-702-6946-4
UNITED NATIONS. (2017). World Happiness Report. Accessed in May/2017. Available at: <http://worldhappiness.report/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2017/03/HR17.pdf> 
VEENHOVEN, R. (2002). Why Social Policy Needs Subjective Indicators. Social Indicators Research. Vol. 58, Issue 1-3, pp. 33-45. doi: 10.1023/A:1015723614574
VEENHOVEN, R. (2006). The Four Qualities of Life. Ordering Concepts and Measures of the Good Life. Mark McGillivray & Mathew Clark (Eds.) “Understanding Human Well-being”, United Nations. ISBN 92-808-1130-4
WILLIAMS, W.T., LAMBERT, J.M., LANCE, G.N. (1966). Multivariate Methods in Plant Ecology. V. Similarity Analyses and Information Analysis. Journal of Ecology, Vol. 54, Issue 2, pp. 427-445. doi: 10.2307/2257960
WITTEN, I. H.; FRANK, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Elsevier, San Francisco. ISBN 01-237-4856-9
WORLD BANK (2011). 2011 World Development Report – Conflict Security and Development. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. Washington D.C. Available at: < https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDRS/Resources/WDR2011_Full_Text.pdf >
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (2007). Working Paper no. 9: Aid Effectiveness and Health. Making Health Systems Work. Department for Health Policy, Development and Services Health Systems and Services WHO, Geneva. Available at: <http://www.who.int/hdp/publications/aid.pdf?ua=1>
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (2010). Social Determinants of Health and Well-Being Among Young People. Health Behaviour in School-Aged Children (HBSC). Study: International Report from 2009/2010 Survey. Available at: <http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/163857/Social-determinants-of-health-and-well-being-among-young-people.pdf?ua=1> 
WU, JI., CHAN, C. K. (2013). Prediction of Hourly Solar Radiation with Multi-Model Framework. Energy Conversion and Management. Elsevier, Vol. 76, pp. 347-355. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2013.07.067
